|*NOTE: As of December 2012, the official pgbackups:auto-month addon is free again, making this script redundant. I'll leave it here for general interest, and in case Heroku decide to start charging for the addon again in the future.*|

h1. heroku-pgpy

Lightweight Heroku pgbackups implementation for Python.

Until mid-2012 Heroku's free *pgbackups* offering included an *auto-month* service, which provided automated daily backups with a daily, weekly and monthly archive. This is no longer included on the free database tier, so @pgpy@ provides a script that can be called *server-side* from "Heroku Scheduler":https://addons.heroku.com/scheduler (their cron package) to automate your backups.

Various Ruby gems exist that perform similar functions, but most seem to upload the backups to S3 whereas I wanted to use the native pgbackups storage mechanism. Also, how about that Python, you guys?

By examining the official "Toolbelt":https://github.com/heroku/heroku/ client I was able to write a small Python library that uses the native platform functions to create, store and inventory backups.

h2. Installation

You probably want to include pgpy in your project as a submodule, as it will need to be pushed to Heroku along with the rest of your project. See the "docs":http://git-scm.com/book/en/Git-Tools-Submodules on submodules if you need help.

bc. $ cd myproject
$ git submodule add git://github.com/BigglesZX/heroku-pgpy.git heroku-pgpy

@pgpy@ requires the Requests library so that will need to be present in your project environment. If you use @pip@, you're in luck.

bc. $ pip install requests

h2. Configuration

None, as @pgpy@ picks up all the info it needs by inspecting your Heroku environment variables.

h2. Usage

Run @pgpy@ from Heroku Scheduler, or manually via @heroku run python heroku-pgpy/pg.py@ or via the shell using @heroku bash@. *Note:* @pgpy@ cannot be run locally. It is designed to be run on the server side where the Heroku features are accessible.

With the @--show@ option @pgpy@ will show your recent backups; with the @--capture@ option it will create one, expiring an old backup if necessary.

bc. $ heroku run python heroku-pgpy/pg.py --show
$ heroku run python heroku-pgpy/pg.py --capture

**It is strongly recommended that you schedule your backups to run no frequently than once a day, as per the original schedule of the pgbackups addon at the auto-month level.**

h2. Troubleshooting

@pgpy@ identifies itself as the Heroku client gem in order to access server-side resources. If your backups fail with errors like "your Heroku client version is out of date", ensure you have the latest copy of @pgpy@. The latest version should increment the @HEROKU_GEM_VERSION@ var at the top of the file so that it matches a recent version of the official gem. See "here":https://github.com/heroku/heroku/blob/master/lib/heroku/version.rb#L2 for the latest if you feel like changing it yourself.

h2. Resources

Based on an inspection of the Heroku client code "here":https://github.com/heroku/heroku/blob/master/lib/heroku/client/pgbackups.rb and "here":https://github.com/heroku/heroku/blob/master/lib/heroku/command/pgbackups.rb. Thanks to Will at Heroku for his "assistance":http://stackoverflow.com/questions/11953272/what-commands-does-heroku-pgbackupscapture-run-on-the-server-to-perform-bac#comment15940432_11954250 and "approval":http://stackoverflow.com/questions/12295969/can-someone-from-heroku-confirm-my-backup-script-doesnt-violate-their-terms/12307746#12307746 .

h2. Obligatory Disclaimer

This is beta software still under development, and while all functionality within @pgpy@ is taken from the official Heroku client, it is used at your own risk. @pgpy@ uses API calls that are subject to change, so it may be necessary to update the library from time to time to keep up with changes to the Heroku platform.